Transcriber: isabella hilário
Reviewer: Emma Gon
You're about to hold a plank.
Just 60 seconds.
You know it’s coming.
That tension in your core.
The burn in your arms.
The mental countdown ticking away.
You’re already thinking,
Now imagine you push through that feeling.
You hold on.
Maybe your body starts shaking.
Your mind is screaming for you to stop.
You tell yourself just one more second,
and you make it to 60.
You’re feeling pretty proud of yourself.
(Cheers and applause)
But then you don’t stop at 60 seconds.
You don't stop at five minutes.
You keep going for an hour,
for two hours and then ten hours.
Yep, ten hours, ten minutes,
and ten seconds.
That's exactly what George Hood did
when he set the world record
for the longest plank in history,
a feat that most people
would not believe possible.
I met George eight years ago
when he set the record,
at that time, five hours.
And I’ll tell you this,
he just looked like the definition
of mental toughness.
The focus in his eyes was razor sharp
and he was drenched in sweat.
He was hurting.
You could see it in his face.
Feel it in his body, but he didn’t stop.
Later I asked him,
George, how do you do it?
His answer surprised me.
The plank is 90% mental.
George told me
he kept his mind busy
distracting himself by focusing on
the conversations in the room,
drawing energy
from the people around him.
But there was something
deeper happening here.
We often think of grit
as that mental toughness
that helps people achieve
extraordinary things,
like ultramarathoners finishing
races with broken bones.
But here's the twist.
Grit isn't just about willpower.
It’s rooted in biology, and the most
powerful indicator to date is a protein
that we’re just starting to understand,
called Brain-derived
neurotrophic factor, or BDNF.
Think of BDNF as
fertilizer for your brain.
A protein that helps neurons,
the cells in your brain,
grow, stay healthy, and
communicate more effectively.
This protein is crucial for things
like memory and mental resilience.
Many things increase BDNF,
including sunshine, blueberries,
and antidepressants.
Exercise increases BDNF the most.
And the plank?
Yes, that simple yoga pose,
just might be one of the best exercises
for building mental toughness.
I’m a clinical professor and diplomat
in the Department of
Preventive Medicine at UCSD.
I’ve been doing clinical research
for over 40 years.
In the clinic,
many of the patients I care for
are so-called medically destitute.
Some had a heart attack
or stroke in their 40s.
Some experienced
a horrific accident in their 20s,
rendering them unemployable,
stripping them of everything
and leaving them with chronic pain
or disability and
a heavy dose of despair.
In no way am I suggesting something as
basic as a plank can fix these conditions.
But more research is warranted
to learn the potential benefits.
What makes the concept of grit
and BDNF so compelling to me
are real life examples of individuals
enduring these devastating conditions.
Researchers and clinicians still have a
lot of questions about grit and the plank.
No one has ever studied
BDNF during a plank.
Yet, what we know is this:
the most effective exercises
for raising BDNF levels
are those requiring mental effort.
If you've ever done a plank, you know
how quickly mental fortitude is required.
That, along with what
we've learned from George,
leads us to believe the plank
may be one of the most efficient
and effective ways of increasing BDNF.
You see, grit is not just for planks.
And BDNF is not just a theory,
it’s backed by science.
A 2005 article in the aptly
named journal Hippocampus
described an animal study
in which exhausting physical exercises
like continuous swimming
produce less BDNF
than exercise that required
mental focus, like navigating mazes.
In people, activities
such as yoga, of all things
that combine physical effort
and concentration,
have produced some of the highest levels
of BDNF ever measured.
Currently, I’m designing
a study for people like Daniel
to see if the plank relieves pain.
Daniel suffers from
a very rare condition
known as Complex regional
pain syndrome, or CRPS,
which is infamous as
one of the most painful diseases.
There is no known cure.
As one patient said,
the slight sensation of water dripping
on my foot feels like hot lead.
Despite living with
this excruciating pain,
Daniel managed to do
a plank for over nine hours
on his CRPS arm.
Think about that for a minute.
The most physically and mentally
challenging exercises helped
one of the most painful conditions.
Now we have evidence that an important
part of the answer lies in BDNF.
In August of 2024, an article appeared
in Experimental Neurobiology titled
“Modulation of BDNF
by Physical Exercise.”
They found exercise
doubled the level of BDNF.
I am here to raise awareness
so that this relationship
between exercise, BDNF
and improving the quality of life
may be studied further.
BDNF is hot in the research world.
I'm about to make it hotter.
(Cheers and applause)
George, Daniel and
my patients deserve as much.
Now I'm going to leave you
with the challenge.
The next time you feel you need
more grit in your life, do a plank.
If you can't get on the floor,
do it against a wall.
It only takes a minute,
but that minute can be transformative.
Thank you. (Applause)